Source URL: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Saint-Patrick

Saint Patrick | Biography, Facts, Feast Day, Miracles, & Death | Britannica
Click here for ad-free access to your Britannica School or Library account.
How Do You Tell the Difference Between Total, Annular, Solar, and Lunar Eclipses?
The Sun Was Eaten: 6 Ways Cultures Have Explained Eclipses
St. Patrick, stained-glass window in the Cathedral of Christ the Light, Oakland, California.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
Ancient Origins - Saint Patrick: When the True Story is More Exciting than the Legend
Historic UK - St Patrick – The most celebrated Welshman in America?
Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students.
René Ostberg is an associate editor at Encyclopaedia Britannica covering literature, popular music, and Catholicism.
Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors.
to parts of Ireland and was probably partly responsible for the Christianization of the
St. Patrick was born in Britain of a Romanized family. At age 16 he was kidnapped by Irish raiders and carried into
in Ireland. After six years in servitude, he had a dream of his escape and fled his master. Surviving a harrowing journey back to Britain, he was eventually reunited with his family.
There are many legends associated with the life of St. Patrick. According to one, he miraculously drove all the snakes of Ireland into the sea. He is said to have used the three leaflets of the
. He reportedly raised as many as 33 people from the dead.
Here's what you need to know about St. Patrick's Day
Trump says Ireland cheats the US as its leader joins him to celebrate St. Patrick's Day
In the 5th century St. Patrick established his principal church in Ireland on the hill fort site of Ard Macha (Armagh). Present-day Armagh city and district (historical County Armagh) in Northern Ireland is home to St. Patrick's Cathedral (Church of Ireland).
(flourished 5th century, Britain and Ireland; feast day March 17) is the
to Ireland and was probably responsible in part for the Christianization of the
. He is known only from two short works, the
Learn more about the life and career of St. Patrick.
of a Romanized family. When he was 16 years old, Irish raiders tore him from the villa of his father, Calpurnius, a
in Ireland. He spent six bleak years there as a herdsman, during which time he turned with
to his faith. Upon dreaming that the ship in which he was to escape was ready, he fled his enslaver and found passage to Britain. There he came near to
and suffered a second brief captivity before he was reunited with his family. Thereafter he may have paid a short visit to the Continent.
tells of a dream, after his return to Britain, in which one Victoricus delivered him a letter headed “The Voice of the Irish.” As Patrick read it, he seemed to hear a certain company of Irish
him to walk once more among them. “Deeply moved,” he says, “I could read no more.” Nevertheless, because of the shortcomings of his education, he was reluctant for a long time to respond to the call. Even on the eve of his reembarkation for Ireland, he was beset by doubts of his fitness for the task. Once in the field, however, his hesitations vanished. Utterly confident in the Lord, he journeyed far and wide,
with untiring zeal. In diplomatic fashion he brought gifts to a chieftain here and a lawgiver there but accepted none from any. On at least one occasion, he was cast into chains. On another, he addressed with lyrical
a last farewell to his converts who had been slain or kidnapped by the soldiers of
. The evocation of such incidents of what he called his “laborious episcopate” was his reply to a charge—to his great grief,
superiors in Britain—that he had originally sought office for the sake of office. In fact, he was a humble-minded man, pouring forth a continuous paean of thanks to his Maker for having chosen him as the instrument whereby multitudes who had worshipped “idols and unclean things” had become “the people of God.”
The phenomenal success of Patrick’s mission is not, however, the full measure of his personality. Since his writings have come to be better understood, it is increasingly recognized that, despite their occasional incoherence, they mirror a truth and a simplicity of the rarest quality. Not since
had any religious diarist bared his inmost soul as Patrick did in his writings. As D.A. Binchy, the most austerely critical of Patrician (i.e., of Patrick) scholars, put it, “The
and spiritual greatness of the man shines through every stumbling sentence of his ‘rustic’
when Patrick was born. There are, however, a number of indicators that his missionary career occurred within the second half of the 5th century. In the Coroticus letter, his mention of the
as still “heathen” indicates that the letter must have been written between 451, the date generally accepted as that of the Franks’ irruption into
, and 496, when they were baptized en masse. Patrick, who speaks of himself as having evangelized heathen Ireland, is not to be confused with
in 431 as “first bishop to the Irish believers in Christ.”
Toward the end of Patrick’s life, he retired to Saul (a village in the former county
to him that he was to die at Saul, the site of his first church, despite his wishes to die within the ecclesiastical metropolis of Ireland. His
were administered by St. Tussach (also spelled Tassach or Tassac).
Before the end of the 7th century, Patrick had become a legendary figure, and the
have continued to grow. One of these would have it that he drove the
of Ireland into the sea to their destruction. A 12th-century
claims that Patrick raised 33 people from the dead, some of whom are said to have been deceased for many years. He also reportedly prayed for the provision of food for hungry sailors traveling by land through a desolate area, and a herd of
, three persons in one God, to an unbeliever by showing the example of the three-leaved plant with one stalk. Traditionally, the Irish have worn shamrocks, the national flower of Ireland, in their lapels on
Statue of St. Patrick with Croagh Patrick in the background, County Mayo, Ireland. The mountain is the site of a religious pilgrimage that takes place annually on the last Sunday in July, known as Reek Sunday.
to sites believed to hold an association with him. One of these is the annual pilgrimage to the top of
, known as Reek Sunday after the mountain’s nickname, “the Reek.” Reputedly, Patrick spent 40 days and nights
into a lake at the base of the mountain, known as Log na nDeamhan (Demon’s Hollow). Thousands of pilgrims scale the 765-meter- (2,510-foot-) tall mountain on Reek Sunday, rain or shine, many of them beginning before dawn and some attempting the journey in their bare feet. Three
along the route, known as stations, serve as stopping points where pilgrims can pray, and
Another pilgrimage site is St. Patrick’s Purgatory, located on Station Island in Lough Derg in
. Patrick is said to have been shown the torments of
on the island, after which he was inspired to better convince the doubters among his converts of the proof of a Christian
priory was founded on Station Island in the 12th or 13th century. In the 16th century the tradition of undergoing a three-day pilgrimage on the island began. Considered to be the most grueling of Christian pilgrimages, the experience demands three days of sleepless fasting and constant prayer, all the while going barefoot on the island’s stony landscape. The pilgrimage is largely restricted to the summer months.